# 34. Distributed Mailbox Listeners Configuration

Date: 2020-04-23

## Status

Proposed

Supercedes [26. Removing a configured additional MailboxListener](0026-removing-configured-additional-mailboxListeners.md)

## Context

James enables a user to register additional mailbox listeners.

The distributed James server is handling mailbox event processing (mailboxListener execution) using a RabbitMQ work-queue
per listener.

Mailbox listeners can be registered to be triggered every time an event is generated by user interaction with their 
mailbox. They are being executed in a distributed fashion following the workqueue messaging pattern. The "group" is an 
attribute of the mailbox listener identifying to which work queue they belong.

Currently, mailbox listeners are determined by the guice bindings of the server and additional mailbox listeners defined
via configuration files.

While the configuration might be specific for each James server, what actually is defined in RabbitMQ is common. 
Heterogeneous configuration might then result in unpredictable RabbitMQ resource status. This was left as a limitation
of [26. Removing a configured additional MailboxListener](0026-removing-configured-additional-mailboxListeners.md).

## Decision

We need to centralize the definition of mailbox listeners.

An event sourcing system will track the configured mailbox listeners.

It will have the following commands:

 - **AddListener**: Add a given listener. This should be rejected if the group is already used.
 - **RemoveListener**: Remove a given listener.

It will have the following events:

 - **ListenerAdded**: A mailbox listener is added
 - **ListenerRemoved**: A mailbox listener is removed

A subscriber will react to these events to modify the RabbitMQ resource accordingly by adding queues, adding or removing
bindings.

This event sourcing system differs from the one defined in
[26. Removing a configured additional MailboxListener](0026-removing-configured-additional-mailboxListeners.md) by the
fact that we should also keep track of listener configuration.

Upon start, James will ensure the **configured mailbox listener event sourcing system** contains the guice injected 
listeners, and add them if missing (handling the RabbitMQ bindings by this mean), then starts the eventBus which will
consume the given queues.

If a listener is configured with a class unknown to James, the start-up does not fail but an ERROR log is emitted. This 
can happen if a custom jar, containing user implemented mailbox listeners is partially deployed. This way an admin can 
easily unconfigure that given listener using standard webadmin APIs. Read notes regarding 
[impact and alternatives](#error-a-listener-cant-be-registered).

This differs from [26. Removing a configured additional MailboxListener](0026-removing-configured-additional-mailboxListeners.md)
by the fact we no longer need to register all listeners at once.

A WebAdmin endpoint will allow:

 - **to add a listener** to the one configured. Such a call:
    - Will fail if the listener class is not on the local classpath, or if the corresponding group is not part of the
     configured listeners aggregate.
    - Upon success the listener is added to the **configured mailbox listener aggregate**, and the listener is 
    registered locally. No broadcast is attempted, meaning that other James servers will need a reboot to actually start 
    consuming the queue.
 - **to remove a listener**. Such a call:
    - Will fail if the listener is required by Guice bindings on the current server or if the listener is not configured.
    - Upon success, the listener is removed from the **configured mailbox listener aggregate**, and the listener is 
    unregistered locally. No broadcast is attempted, meaning that other James servers will need a reboot to actually stop 
    consuming the queue. However, new events will stop arriving in the queue as its binding will be removed.
    
[Broadcast of topology changes](#broadcast-of-topology-changes) is an enhancement of the following proposal removing 
some of the aforementioned limitations.

Integration tests relying on additional mailbox listeners of the distributed James product will require to be ported to 
perform additional mailbox listener registry with this WebAdmin endpoint. JMAP SpamAssassin, quota mailing tests are 
concerned.

We will also expose an endpoint listing the groups currently in use, and for each group the associated configuration, if 
any. This will query the **configured mailbox listener aggregate**.

We will introduce a health check to actually ensure that RabbitMQ resources match the configured listeners, and propose
a WebAdmin endpoint to add/remove bindings/queue in a similar fashion of what had been proposed in 
[26. Removing a configured additional MailboxListener](0026-removing-configured-additional-mailboxListeners.md). This 
can happen if the James server performing the listener registration fails to create the group/queue.

## Consequences

All products other than "Distributed James" are unchanged.

All the currently configured additional listeners will need to be registered.

The definition of mailbox listeners is thus centralized and we are not exposed to an heterogeneous configuration 
incident.

Mailbox listeners no longer required by guice will still need to be instanciable (even with empty content). They will 
be considered as additional listener thus requiring explicit admin unconfiguration, which will be mentioned in the 
related upgrade instructions. Read notes about [rolling upgrade scenarii](#rolling-upgrade-scenari).

## Notes

## Broadcast of topology changes

A broadcast can be attempted to propagate eventBus topology changes:

 - Each James server registers an exclusive queue to an "eventBus topology change" exchange.
 - Upon modification of the actual topology an "add" or "remove" event is emitted.
 - Each running James reacts to these events by instantiating the corresponding listener and starting consuming the 
 associated queue, or stops consuming the associated queue.
 
If a listener is added but is not in the classpath, an ERROR log is emitted. This can happen during a rolling upgrade,
which defines a new guice binding for a new mailbox listener. Events will still be emitted (and consumed by other James
servers) however a local James upgrade will be required to effectively be able to start processing these events. The 
binding will not need to be redefined.

Propagating changes will thus no longer need server reboot.

This won't be contributed in the short run as it requires significant development effort.

### Rolling upgrade scenari

During a rolling upgrade, the james version is heterogeneous across the cluster, and so might be the mailbox listeners
required at the Guice level.

**case 1**: James Server version 1 does not require listener A, James server version 2 requires listener A.

Since listener A is registered, James server version 1 can not be rebooted prior being upgraded. (As listener A cannot be instanciated)

**case 2**: James Server version 1 requires listener A, James server version 2 does not requires listener A.

Upgrading to James version 2 means  that listener A is still registered as an additional listener, that needs to be 
manually unconfigured once the rolling upgrade finished. Whish is acceptable in upgrade instruction. We need to make 
sure the listeners could still be instanciated (even with empty code) for a transition period.

## Error: a listener can't be registered

If a mailbox listener can't be register, eg if its class is not on the classpath, JAMES startup, according to this
proposal won't be aborted.

This results of an effort to allow an admin can easily unconfigure that given listener using standard webadmin APIs.

However, this will result in a James server not consuming that given group (remote server possessing the JAR will still 
correctly process all events). This needs a careful log review to get the admin reacting upon the incident.

This result in an incorrect state locally, but the james cluster as a whole still behaves well, as James servers which
can still run the listener.

We explored the following alternatives:

 - **Failing** upon James startup, but providing a CLI utility to unconfigure a falty group if needed.
 - **Failing** upon James startup, but running James in a downgraded state allowing to unconfigure the falty listener.
 
The fact that James is failing forces an admin to react, however 'downgraded' status might lead to automated tools to 
believe James is fully operational, while it is not the case.

We did not chose these options as they imply more development for limited safety gains.
